So now we're going to go
through some example code.
The emaildb.
Now, what we're going to do here is
we're going to read the file mbox,
or mbox.txt, that we've been doing.
And we are going to put that
stuff into a database.
So we're going to read it.
We're going to parse it.
And you know how we did a dictionary but
now we're going to do it in a database.
It's kind of like we're taking the
dictionary and putting it in a database.
And if I talk about dictionaries,
you recall I said,
dictionaries are like a real
cool in-memory database.
Now we're flipping it and we're going to
go do a out-of-memory database.
So let's take a look at the code,
so here we go.
The name of this file is emaildb and
it's in the code on pythonlearn.com,
code folder on pythonlearn.com.
And so, import sqlite3, well that is importing
the library that we're going to
use to talk to the SQL database.
So, this line here basically says, we're
going to use a database in this application
and we're going to store that database
in the file emaildb.sqllite.
So we're going to call library routines in
SQLite and that's going to read and
write to that disk.
It's not a file we want to mess with.
We have a viewer for it.
called the SQLite browser
that we will be able to view this.
And so this basically says it's
creating a connection object and
the connection object says, let's make
a connection to a file, basically, but
we're really talking a library
code that SQLite3.
And so that's what this does.
And open takes two steps,
kind of like sockets.
So you sort of start with this and
then you actually
create a thing through which you can send
commands, called what's called a cursor.
It's like the command or
the row that's coming back,
those are all cursors. And so we take the
connection object and we ask for a cursor.
And so we get the cursor back and
this cur variable now has
the cursor object in it.
So we have the cursor object and
we call the execute method, and
this is just a triple-quoted string that
I broke in the line just so we could see it.
And so what we're going to do is we're
going to create a table called Counts.
And every time we're going to run this
program, we're not going to have to
remove the file, we're just going to drop
the table Counts and then create it again.
And then we're going to
a CREATE statement here, so
we're going to start the connection,
send a DROP TABLE, this is like
typing DROP TABLE in the little SQL
browser that we were playing with.
And then we're going to create
a table called Counts
with an email address that's text and
an integer field called count.
So we just made a table.
And again, in Python we're
just sending these commands.
Now it's going to look a little familiar.
We're going to prompt for a file name.
And if it's not less than one,
we're going to assume mbox-short.txt.
We're going to open it. Again,
this is really familiar.
for line in file handler.
If the line doesn't start
with From: , continue.
That's familiar, that's our throw away all
the lines except for those that say From.
Then we're going to split them.
And we're going to grab pieces sub one,
because that's what happens after
the From:
Okay, so this part right here looks
exactly like code you've
probably written 15 times by now.
But now it's different.
So we have this email address.
You know, csev@umich.edu or whatever.
So we're going to ask our database.
SELECT count FROM the Counts
table WHERE email equals.
And then we have this
little question mark guy.
The question mark is a place
holder to be filled in and
so that says this is going to be something.
And then we have a second parameter,
and this syntax, you'll get used to it,
it looks a little bit weird.
This is a tuple.
Tuple.
Parentheses thing. We only really need
one in this tuple, but
if you don't put the comma then
it thinks it's an expression.
So a single tuple is, you know,
parenthesis email comma and
that's a one-tuple, and the first thing in
the tuple is what will be substituted for
the question mark, okay?
And so this is saying SELECT count
FROM Counts WHERE email equals
csev@umich.edu as if it were in quotes,
but this is how we substitute things in.
Because if we did string
concatenation, which we could do,
there's certain dangerous
things that happen.
And so we do this parameter
substitution with these question marks
to avoid what's called SQL injection.
But don't worry about that.
Then what we got is the cursor is, so
the cursor now has done a SELECT,
that has what's called a row set.
And that's all the rows
that would have met that.
Including potentially no rows whatsoever.
So we take that cursor we call fetchone.
fetchone brings us back one row into
memory and gives it to us as a list.
[SOUND] As a list and then sub zero,
seeing as how we only selected one thing,
this list only has one thing in it.
So the sub zero.
And that is the count field from
the database, so that's how we get the row
fetched and pull it in, and I put this in
a try/except block in case it's not there.
So this might blow up
if there is no row.
If I got zero rows, then this
fetchone is going to blow up and
it's going to come down to the except.
But let's just say it's already
there, then what I'm going to do
is I'm going to run another
thing that says UPDATE, SQL,
the database table Counts SET
the column count equals count plus one,
the current value, WHERE email equals and
then again, this
little question mark pattern and using
the variable email as the WHERE clause.
And so that actually takes in our
little database, we have a row and
a column and that takes that
from a 1 to a 2.
That's what it does if it's
got the right email address.
If this try fails, there was no row,
then we're going to use an INSERT.
We're going to add a new row at
the end of the table, and
we're going to INSERT INTO Counts
using the email and the count.
And again we'll use the little
question mark thing.
And the count starts at 1.
So we'll put a new person in,
Jen or whoever is going in, and
we give her a 1 when she starts out.
And then we do this thing called
commit, okay?
And so commit basically says,
if you've been doing stuff in
memory, dear SQLite,
please write it back to disk.
And so commit is a very important part
to say, everything I've done up till
now, there is one step and
maybe two steps here,
they don't always have, not always been
written to disk but until you say commit.
And when it comes out of commit,
then everything on disk matches all
the commands that you typed, okay?
Okay.
So, if we look at how
this code is going to run,
it's going to read all the From addresses
just like this and this is like our .get.
Remember the get with the default value
and the plus one? We're either going to
insert a new one in with a value of 1 or
we're going to update and increment it.
So at the end of the day we're going to have
a table that's the name and the count.
Name, count, name, count, name, count.
So that's what this loop does.
Then the last thing we're
going to do is we're going to
do a SELECT statement to read the stuff.
Again, very similar to the
dictionary assignment.
So we're going to say,
SELECT email, count.
Two columns from the Counts table, and
we're going to order this by the count, count
and we're going to do this descending, so
the large numbers are going to be at the top.
And LIMIT 10 is a bit of SQL that says,
oh look, there might be a thousand
records but only give me the first 10.
And this limit applies after the ORDER BY,
so this is a way of us saying,
the top 10 contributors or
the top 10 email senders.
Then what we do is we call cur.execute.
And we run that SQL, and then we have an
iterator that's going to go through the for.
So we're going to get some number
of rows of the people up to 10.
And then row is going to be an iteration
variable that just walks through the rows,
pulling each row from the database.
It could be a million rows.
It could be zero rows.
Or it could be ten rows. And the row
that we get, of course, is an array so
that sub zero is the email and
sub one is the count.
And we convert this to the string in
case it had some Unicode in it so
that it prints out properly.
And so you'll see us use this little str
guy sometimes when we pull stuff out of
the database, because it might be in
like UTF-8 if it has sort of like a
funny character on the top or whatever.
And then when we're all done, so
that loop runs and we see the top ten, and
then we close the cursor and
then we're all said and done, okay?
And so that is our program.
That's the program.
Okay, so let's go ahead and run it.
This'll be not too exciting.
So here I am.
I can say python emaildb.py, okay?
And I can say mbox-short.txt.
Now, actually before I say that,
let me go ahead and
run the SQLite browser,
and open a database and
go into my desktop, pythonlearn.
code, and then I think,
if all's well, see email.sqlite.
Now the reason I'm opening this now,
before I hit enter here,
is you can see that the database
structure already exists, okay?
And that's because if
I go back to my code.
If I go back to my code,
and I didn't have to do this.
But basically it made a connection to the
database, it dropped an existing table and
it recreated the table, and
then it paused and waited for
the file name that I wanted to work with.
And so the table's actually created and
the file's actually created.
Might have needed to
put a commit in there.
But there we are, okay?
So there is
our email.
And now I'm going to press enter.
So what this is going to do is read and then
insert/create, insert/create.
And update.
And so it ran.
And this here is the output
of that SELECT statement.
And it looks very familiar.
We've basically implemented a dictionary
using a database, which is the difference
between a dictionary and a database is we
could have 100 million records in this and
not run our computer out of memory,
because dictionaries all live in
the memory of the computer.
So now if I come over here to the
browser and I take a look at the data and
I hit refresh, looky here. So I can click
on this count and we can get it sorted.
So there we go, and
that's it's now sorted.
And you can see there's
a total of eleven records.
Not very exciting, you know.
And there they are.
And so the Counts show up, that's
the only table that I've got.
So now what can happen
is I can run it again.
python emaildb.py
But this time instead I'm
going to do the whole mbox.txt.
Takes little longer,
little longer [NOISE].
Okay. so now it did a lot more, and
I don't have to reopen it because I
didn't actually delete and
recreate the database.
So I can actually just
hit this refresh button.
And then it goes and reads the thing
and there's 46 people and
if I hit the count,
then I can see it sorted by count.
I can see it sorted by email,
etc., etc., etc.
And so now we have our classic thing,
except what we're doing is
writing a database, okay?
Thanks.